chore: document RBAC usage (#14065)
coder/coder: coderd/rbac/USAGE.md

# Using RBAC

# Overview

> _NOTE: you should probably read [`README.md`](README.md) beforehand, but it's
> not essential._

## Basic structure

RBAC is made up of nouns (the objects which are protected by RBAC rules) and
verbs (actions which can be performed on nouns).<br> For example, a
**workspace** (noun) can be **created** (verb), provided the requester has
appropriate permissions.

## Roles

We have a number of roles (some of which have legacy connotations back to v1).

These can be found in `coderd/rbac/roles.go`.

> | Role                 | Description                                                         | Example resources (non-exhaustive)           |
> | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
> | **owner**            | Super-user, first user in Coder installation, has all\* permissions | all\*                                        |
> | **member**           | A regular user                                                      | workspaces, own details, provisioner daemons |
> | **auditor**          | Viewer of audit log events, read-only access to a few resources     | audit logs, templates, users, groups         |
> | **templateAdmin**    | Administrator of templates, read-only access to a few resources     | templates, workspaces, users, groups         |
> | **userAdmin**        | Administrator of users                                              | users, groups, role assignments              |
> | **orgAdmin**         | Like **owner**, but scoped to a single organization                 | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
> | **orgMember**        | Like **member**, but scoped to a single organization                | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
> | **orgAuditor**       | Like **auditor**, but scoped to a single organization               | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
> | **orgUserAdmin**     | Like **userAdmin**, but scoped to a single organization             | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
> | **orgTemplateAdmin** | Like **templateAdmin**, but scoped to a single organization         | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
> 
> _\* except some, which are not important to this overview_

Reviewer: The `Example resources` does not indicate what actions the role can do on said resources. Saying `member `has `provisioner` resource is correct, but it is only `read` access such that they can provision their workspace. This table does not indicate which actions are granted, so it might appear that `templates == full CRUD` when it does not.

It might be confusing at this point in the doc to list the nuanced permissions that are required for the role to work, but probably not intuitive in the outright. An example is user -> provisioner. This is required because a user needs to read the provisioner to know if their workspace can be provisioned, but it does not grant CRUD over said provisioners.

It should be clarified somehow that these resources have various limitations based on the roles, or if we just listed the more unique aspects of each role in relation to each other. 

```suggestion
| Role                 | Description                                                         | Example resources (non-exhaustive)           |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| **owner**            | Super-user, first user in Coder installation, has all\* permissions | all\*                                        |
| **member**           | A regular user                                                      | workspaces, own details, provisioner daemons |
| **auditor**          | Viewer of audit log events, read-only access to a few resources     | audit logs, templates, users, groups         |
| **templateAdmin**    | Administrator of templates, read-only access to a few resources     | templates, workspaces, users, groups         |
| **userAdmin**        | Administrator of users                                              | users, groups, role assignments              |
| **orgAdmin**         | Like **owner**, but scoped to a single organization                 | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
| **orgMember**        | Like **member**, but scoped to a single organization                | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
| **orgAuditor**       | Like **auditor**, but scoped to a single organization               | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
| **orgUserAdmin**     | Like **userAdmin**, but scoped to a single organization             | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |
| **orgTemplateAdmin** | Like **templateAdmin**, but scoped to a single organization         | _(org-level equivalent)_                     |

**Note an example resource indicates the role has at least 1 permission related to the resource. Not that the role has complete CRUD access to the resource.**

_\* except some, which are not important to this overview_
```

| **ssh**                 | SSH into a workspace                    |
| **application_connect** | Connect to workspace apps via a browser |
| **view_insights**       | View deployment insights                |
| **start**               | Start a workspace                       |
| **stop**                | Stop a workspace                        |
| **assign**              | Assign user to role / org               |

# Creating a new noun

In the following example, we're going to create a new RBAC noun for a new entity
called a "frobulator" _(just some nonsense word for demonstration purposes)_.

_Refer to https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/14055 to see a full
implementation._

## Creating a new entity

If you're creating a new resource which has to be owned by users of differing
roles, you need to create a new RBAC resource.

Let's say we're adding a new table called `frobulators` (we'll use this table
later):

```sql
CREATE TABLE frobulators
(
  id           uuid NOT NULL,
  user_id      uuid NOT NULL,
  model_number TEXT NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (id),
  UNIQUE (model_number),
  FOREIGN KEY (user_id) REFERENCES users (id) ON DELETE CASCADE

> );

Reviewer: We should define the scope of `frobulators` up front here. All resources in Coder need to live in at least 1 bucket. Site, Organization, and/or User.

In `TestRolePermissions` a `frobulator` is defined as: 
```golang
rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(currentUser.String()).InOrg(orgID)
```

In `dbauthz`, `GetUserFrobulators` defines one as
```golang
rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(userID.String())
```

These are not the same. The first belongs to an organization **and** a user. The second belongs to just the user. 

Meaning without `InOrg(orgID)`, organization roles have no authority over said resource.

So if we intend to org scope this resource (which is usually the case), we should also add an `organization_id` column.

----

Almost all our database objects have a `RBACObject()` method that handles this ownership scoping. [See workspace](https://github.com/coder/coder/blob/ceffff9b0676ef708e6ccf40d24279140824e670/coderd/database/modelmethods.go#L169-L178). 

I agree though that this is purely a enforcement by PR reviews, there is no code mechanism to make sure you have inputted the correct fields except the unit test in `dbauthz`. It is not defined in the policy :cry:

```

Let's now add our frobulator noun to `coderd/rbac/policy/policy.go`:

```go
    ...
	"frobulator": {
		Actions: map[Action]ActionDefinition{

> 			ActionCreate: actDef("create a frobulator"),

Reviewer: Just to document a reason for the `actDef()` function. We can move to 
```
ActionCreate:: {Description: "create a frobulator"}
```

Originally there were more fields, and the helper function kept things as a single line. I removed the extra fields that were attempting to apply even more structure and rules on when to use a verb.

Now the function `actDef` is effectively pointless.

			ActionRead:   actDef("read a frobulator"),
			ActionUpdate: actDef("update a frobulator"),
			ActionDelete: actDef("delete a frobulator"),
		},
	},
    ...
```

Entries in the `frobulators` table be created/read/updated/deleted, so we define
those actions.

`policy.go` is used to generate code in `coderd/rbac/object_gen.go`, and we can
execute this by running `make gen`.

Now we have this change in `coderd/rbac/object_gen.go`:

```go
    ...
    // ResourceFrobulator
    // Valid Actions
    //  - "ActionCreate" ::
    //  - "ActionDelete" ::
    //  - "ActionRead" ::
    //  - "ActionUpdate" ::
    ResourceFrobulator = Object{
        Type: "frobulator",
    }
    ...

    func AllResources() []Objecter {
    	...
    	ResourceFrobulator,
    	...
    }
```

This creates a resource which represents this noun, and adds it to a list of all
available resources.

> ## Role Assignment
> 
> In our case, we want **members** to be able to CRUD their own frobulators and we
> want **owners** to CRUD all members' frobulators. This is how most resources
> work, and the RBAC system is setup for this by default.
> 
> However, let's say we want **auditors** to have read-only access to all members'
> frobulators; we need to add it to `coderd/rbac/roles.go`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Role Assignment

In our case, we want **members** to be able to CRUD their own frobulators and we
want **owners** to CRUD all members' frobulators. This is how most resources
work, and the RBAC system is setup for this by default.

However, let's say we want **organization auditors** to have read-only access to all organization's
frobulators; we need to add it to `coderd/rbac/roles.go`:
```

            	            	+++ Actual
            	            	@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
            	            	-(map[policy.Action]bool) {
            	            	+(map[policy.Action]bool) (len=4) {
            	            	+ (policy.Action) (len=6) "create": (bool) true,
            	            	+ (policy.Action) (len=6) "delete": (bool) true,
            	            	+ (policy.Action) (len=4) "read": (bool) true,
            	            	+ (policy.Action) (len=6) "update": (bool) true
            	            	 }
            	Test:       	TestRolePermissions/frobulator-AllActions
            	Messages:   	remaining permissions should be empty for type "frobulator"
FAIL
FAIL	github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac	1.314s
FAIL
```

The message `remaining permissions should be empty for type "frobulator"`
indicates that we're missing tests which validate the desired actions on our new
noun.

> Take a look at `coderd/rbac/roles_test.go` in the
> [reference PR](https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/14055) for a complete
> example

Let's add a test case:

```go
func TestRolePermissions(t *testing.T) {
    ...
    {
        // Users should be able to modify their own frobulators

>         // Admins from the current organization should be able to modify any other user's frobulators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Admins from the current organization should be able to modify any other members' frobulators
```

        // Owner should be able to modify any other user's frobulators
        Name:     "FrobulatorsModify",
        Actions:  []policy.Action{policy.ActionCreate, policy.ActionUpdate, policy.ActionDelete},
        Resource: rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(currentUser.String()).InOrg(orgID),
        AuthorizeMap: map[bool][]hasAuthSubjects{
            true:  {orgMemberMe, orgAdmin, owner},
            false: {setOtherOrg, memberMe, templateAdmin, userAdmin, orgTemplateAdmin, orgUserAdmin, orgAuditor},
        },
    },
    {
        // Users should be able to read their own frobulators

>         // Admins from the current organization should be able to read any other user's frobulators
>         // Auditors should be able to read any other user's frobulators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Admins from the current organization should be able to read any other members' frobulators
        // Auditors should be able to read any other members' frobulators
```

Similarly, the `FrobulatorsReadOnly` test case is only validating
`policy.ActionRead`, which is allowed on all of the above plus the
**orgAuditor** role.

Now the tests pass, because we have covered all the possible scenarios:

```bash
$ go test github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac -count=1
ok  	github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac	1.313s
```

When a case is not covered, you'll see an error like this (I moved the
`orgAuditor` option from `true` to `false):

```bash
--- FAIL: TestRolePermissions (0.79s)
    --- FAIL: TestRolePermissions/FrobulatorsReadOnly (0.01s)
        roles_test.go:737:
            	Error Trace:	/tmp/coder/coderd/rbac/roles_test.go:737
            	Error:      	An error is expected but got nil.
            	Test:       	TestRolePermissions/FrobulatorsReadOnly
            	Messages:   	Should fail: FrobulatorsReadOnly as "org_auditor" doing "read" on "frobulator"
FAIL
FAIL	github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac	1.390s
FAIL
```

This shows you that the `org_auditor` role has `read` permissions on the
frobulator, but no test case covered it.

**NOTE: don't just add cases which make the tests pass; consider all the way in

> which your resource must be used, and test all of those scenarios!**

Reviewer: :partying_face:

# Database authorization

Now that we have the RBAC system fully configured, we need to make use of it.

Let's add a SQL query to `coderd/database/queries/frobulators.sql`:

```sql
-- name: GetUserFrobulators :many
SELECT *
FROM frobulators
WHERE user_id = @user_id::uuid;
```

Once we run `make gen`, we'll find some stubbed code in
`coderd/database/dbauthz/dbauthz.go`.

```go
...
func (q *querier) GetUserFrobulators(ctx context.Context) ([]database.Frobulator, error) {
    panic("not implemented")
}
...
```

Let's modify this function:

```go

> ...
> func (q *querier) GetUserFrobulators(ctx context.Context, userID uuid.UUID) ([]database.Frobulator, error) {
> 	if err := q.authorizeContext(ctx, policy.ActionRead, rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(userID.String())); err != nil {
> 		return nil, err
> 	}
> 	return q.db.GetUserFrobulators(ctx, userID)
> }
> ...
> ```

Reviewer: This is correct, except `rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(userID.String())` should also include an `InOrg(...)` and even an `WithID(...)` to be 100% correct.

Fetching a resource is a super common pattern, and unfortunately you generally need to have the object in hand to know if you can read it. So, the generic function `fetch(...)` handles all of this **iff** you implement `RBACObject()` (which you should!).

```suggestion
...
func (q *querier) GetUserFrobulators(ctx context.Context, userID uuid.UUID) ([]database.Frobulator, error) {
  return fetch(q.log, q.auth, q.db.GetUserFrobulators)(ctx, id)
}
...
```
```

This states that the `policy.ActionRead` permission is required in this query on
the `ResourceFrobulator` resources, and `WithOwner(userID.String())` specifies

> that this user must own the resource.

Reviewer: > `WithOwner(userID.String())` specifies that this user must own the resource

The `WithOwner` and `InOrg` specify what level of permissions can be used. If you refer back to the [readme roles table](https://github.com/coder/coder/blob/ceffff9b0676ef708e6ccf40d24279140824e670/coderd/rbac/README.md#roles) there are 3 levels of permissions that act hierarchical. 

Site will always apply, no matter what. 

If `InOrg` is omitted, then the `Org` column will always read `_` (abstain). No org permissions can apply.

If `WithOwner` is omitted, then the `user` column will always read `_`.

All queries are executed through `dbauthz`, and now our little frobulators are
protected!

# API authorization

API authorization is not strictly required because we have database
authorization in place, but it's a good practice to reject requests as soon as
possible when the requester is unprivileged.

> Take a look at `coderd/frobulators.go` in the
> [reference PR](https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/14055) for a complete
> example

```go
...
func (api *API) listUserFrobulators(rw http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	ctx := r.Context()
	key := httpmw.APIKey(r)

> 	if !api.Authorize(r, policy.ActionRead, rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(key.UserID.String())) {

Reviewer: Add `InOrg()`

called a "frobulator" _(just some nonsense word for demonstration purposes)_.

_Refer to https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/14055 to see a full
implementation._

## Creating a new entity

If you're creating a new resource which has to be acted upon by users of
differing roles, you need to create a new RBAC resource.

Let's say we're adding a new table called `frobulators` (we'll use this table
later):

```sql
CREATE TABLE frobulators
(
  id           uuid NOT NULL,
  user_id      uuid NOT NULL,
  org_id       uuid NOT NULL,
  model_number TEXT NOT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (id),
  UNIQUE (model_number),
  FOREIGN KEY (user_id) REFERENCES users (id) ON DELETE CASCADE,
  FOREIGN KEY (org_id) REFERENCES organizations (id) ON DELETE CASCADE
);
```

Let's now add our frobulator noun to `coderd/rbac/policy/policy.go`:

```go
    ...
	"frobulator": {
		Actions: map[Action]ActionDefinition{
			ActionCreate: {Description: "create a frobulator"},
			ActionRead:   {Description: "read a frobulator"},
			ActionUpdate: {Description: "update a frobulator"},
			ActionDelete: {Description: "delete a frobulator"},
		},
	},
    ...
```

> Entries in the `frobulators` table be created/read/updated/deleted, so we define

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need to create/read/update/delete rows in the `frobulators` table, so we define
```

        Resource: rbac.ResourceFrobulator.WithOwner(uuid.New().String()).InOrg(orgID), // read frobulators of any user
        AuthorizeMap: map[bool][]hasAuthSubjects{
            true:  {owner, orgAdmin, orgAuditor},
            false: {memberMe, orgMemberMe, setOtherOrg, templateAdmin, userAdmin, orgTemplateAdmin, orgUserAdmin},
        },
    },
```

Note how the `FrobulatorsModify` test case is just validating the
`policy.ActionCreate, policy.ActionUpdate, policy.ActionDelete` actions, and
only the **orgMember**, **orgAdmin**, and **owner** can access it.

The `FrobulatorsReadAnyUserInOrg` test case is validating that owners, org
admins & auditors have the `policy.ActionRead` policy which enables them to read
frobulators belonging to any user in a given organization.

The above tests are illustrative not exhaustive, see
[the reference PR](https://github.com/coder/coder/pull/14055) for the rest.

Once we have covered all the possible scenarios, the tests will pass:

```bash
$ go test github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac -count=1
ok  	github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac	1.313s
```

When a case is not covered, you'll see an error like this (I moved the

> `orgAuditor` option from `true` to `false):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`orgAuditor` option from `true` to `false`):
```

```bash
--- FAIL: TestRolePermissions (0.79s)
    --- FAIL: TestRolePermissions/FrobulatorsReadOnly (0.01s)
        roles_test.go:737:
            	Error Trace:	/tmp/coder/coderd/rbac/roles_test.go:737
            	Error:      	An error is expected but got nil.
            	Test:       	TestRolePermissions/FrobulatorsReadOnly
            	Messages:   	Should fail: FrobulatorsReadOnly as "org_auditor" doing "read" on "frobulator"
FAIL
FAIL	github.com/coder/coder/v2/coderd/rbac	1.390s
FAIL
```

This shows you that the `org_auditor` role has `read` permissions on the
frobulator, but no test case covered it.

> **NOTE: don't just add cases which make the tests pass; consider all the way in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTE: don't just add cases which make the tests pass; consider all the ways in
```
